---
title: Building D3-inspired charts with React
date: 2015-09-03 00:00:00 Z
categories:
- nwolverson
- Tech
tags:
- blog
- featured
title-short: React + D3 charts
summary-short: Generating simple charts in a fashion inspired by D3 using React as
  a rendering engine.
author: nwolverson
image: nwolverson/assets/featured/react-charts.jpg
layout: default_post
summary: A foray into generating simple charts in a fashion inspired by D3 using React
  as a rendering engine.
---

From the [D3.js](d3js.org) homepage:

> D3 is not a monolithic framework that seeks to provide every conceivable feature.

D3 focuses on providing tools to construct rich visualisations, rather than an
out of the box solution, but D3 provides a *lot* of tools. The default D3
distribution is about 50KB minified and gzipped, and contains as well as core
functionality around DOM manipulation and selection, data manipulation, and
graphic generation utilities, various other things such as CSV parsing and an XHR
wrapper.

I've experimented with building applications using only D3 and no other libraries,
and a lot can be done with the support of D3, more easily than with the standard JavaScript
browser APIs alone. On the other hand, many developers will find themselves
integrating D3 visualisations as a part of a larger application using some other
framework. They won't want yet another XHR wrapper, or parsing of text data. If
they are using [Underscore](http://underscorejs.org/) they may not want D3's array
utilities. And no doubt most people don't need to combine force layouts, pie charts
and geographic projections on the same page.

More to the point, I don't think of D3 just as a collection of tools but a way of thinking.
Not just "thinking with data-joins", but the realisation that there is an alternative
to just dropping in a standard chart in a hole in a web-page, it's often simple
and more effective to build an appropriate visualisation from the ground up, more
tailored to the data and context.

### D3: A reaction

In this post I'll do a couple of things. Firstly I'll talk about using selected
components of D3 rather than the whole library. Secondly I'll look at an example
of constructing a simple chart in a D3 "style" but using a different framework
to provide the _rendering engine_. I've chosen to use
[React](http://facebook.github.io/react/) in place of D3 to render a chart to the
browser DOM (and as we'll see later, to a string to provide server-side rendering).

Full code for this example can be found [here](https://github.com/nwolverson/blog-react-d3).

### D3 in pieces

If you use D3 you probably include a single `d3.js` script (rather, `d3.min.js`),
but the D3 is arranged modularly. It's combined by a tool (also by Mike Bostock, creator of D3js) called
[SMASH](https://github.com/mbostock/smash). From its `README`:

> SMASH TOGETHER FILES! PROBABLY JAVASCRIPT.

So it's possible to make custom builds of D3 in the same way for including in
your page. You can find out how on the [smash wiki](https://github.com/mbostock/smash/wiki).

Alternatively, D3 is now published on NPM as a collection of separate packages
providing CommonJS modules. Below I'm going to show the creation of some charts
that don't use D3 for rendering, however as I'm not interested in changing the
way their scales work, I'm going to continue to use D3 scales. To do this, I install
the module:

{% highlight sh %}
npm install --save d3-scale
{% endhighlight %}

And then simply require it:

{% highlight js %}
var scale = require('d3-scale');
{% endhighlight %}

Of course it's not that simple, as we're talking about JavaScript included in a browser.
To use a CommonJS module as installed by this node package, you might look to RequireJS,
Browserify or [Webpack](http://webpack.github.io/). In the example accompanying
this post I'm using Browserify.

### Let's Make a React Chart

I'm going to put together some simple charts using React, somewhat following the
examples in the D3 tutorial series [Let's Make a Bar Chart](https://bost.ocks.org/mike/bar/).
The first part culminates in an [example](http://bl.ocks.org/mbostock/7322386) generating a chart composed of `<div>` elements
from an array of input data:

<script src="https://gist.github.com/nwolverson/5fccc7fce135ce99321f.js?file=d3-chart.js"></script>

I want to create this same chart as a React component. Using JSX (via babel) to mix HTML tags
in our JavaScript source, this is very straightforward, a simple component with a `render` function:

<script src="https://gist.github.com/nwolverson/5fccc7fce135ce99321f.js?file=barchart1.js"></script>

This component could be used as `<BarChart data={[1, 2, 3]} />`.
The data is passed in as part of the `data` property, accessed as `this.props.data`.
The function that maps `props.data` to the resulting `<div>` elements corresponds to the data-join
in the D3 version. This particular D3 code only has an enter selection, but the react
code just specifies the desired virtual DOM elements, which would correspond more to
a fuller D3 example including an exit/update selection: if we were to update with different
data, this component will update accordingly.

Again notice that we make use of the D3 scale as per the original, but using
Underscore for the `max` function rather than taking on the `d3-arrays` module.

Similarly, looking at [part II](https://bost.ocks.org/mike/bar/2/) of _Let's Make a Bar Chart_,
we can also create SVG output. The result doesn't need too much comment, other than
to note I've made use of the ES6 features of our babel transform (ES6 classes,
arrow functions, const, template string):

<script src="https://gist.github.com/nwolverson/5fccc7fce135ce99321f.js?file=barchart2.jsx"></script>

The output looks like this (in fact this is literally the resulting DOM):

<style type="text/css">
.chart rect {
  fill: steelblue;
}
.chart text {
  fill: white;
  font: 10px sans-serif;
  text-anchor: end;
}
</style>
<svg class="chart" width="420" height="80" data-reactid=".11g3171jrpc" data-react-checksum="-751185241"><g transform="translate(0,0)" data-reactid=".11g3171jrpc.$0"><rect width="84" height="19" data-reactid=".11g3171jrpc.$0.0"></rect><text x="81" y="9.5" dy=".35em" data-reactid=".11g3171jrpc.$0.1">1</text></g><g transform="translate(0,20)" data-reactid=".11g3171jrpc.$1"><rect width="252" height="19" data-reactid=".11g3171jrpc.$1.0"></rect><text x="249" y="9.5" dy=".35em" data-reactid=".11g3171jrpc.$1.1">3</text></g><g transform="translate(0,40)" data-reactid=".11g3171jrpc.$2"><rect width="420" height="19" data-reactid=".11g3171jrpc.$2.0"></rect><text x="417" y="9.5" dy=".35em" data-reactid=".11g3171jrpc.$2.1">5</text></g><g transform="translate(0,60)" data-reactid=".11g3171jrpc.$3"><rect width="168" height="19" data-reactid=".11g3171jrpc.$3.0"></rect><text x="165" y="9.5" dy=".35em" data-reactid=".11g3171jrpc.$3.1">2</text></g></svg>

### Server-side rendering

So what was the point of all this, other than to make a change of syntax and
maybe switch one dependency for another? Well one thing that React does quite
well is server-side rendering (or so-called _isomorphic JavaScript_): pre-rendering
the same page server side, and making use of the same rendering logic when
making updates on the client side. This might be to improve page load time,
showing content without waiting for JS libraries to load, or to mix statically
rendered content with dynamically rendered content tailored for the user.

In our case the React charts can be just as well rendered server side, without
requiring either a DOM implementation such as `jsdom`, or a bowser engine like PhantomJS.

We use the same chart code module (thanks to the use of browserify), and render it
as part of the HTML source on the server, while rendering to the dom
on the client. For this example I make use of a simple template, where the server
rendering will replace the `reactOutput` placeholder and then the component will
be mounted client-side on the element with id `reactNode`:

{% highlight html %}
<div id="reactNode">
    <%- reactOutput %>
</div>
{% endhighlight %}

The server code makes use of `React.renderToString`:

<script src="https://gist.github.com/nwolverson/5fccc7fce135ce99321f.js?file=server-use.jsx"></script>

while the client simply renders on the mount node:

<script src="https://gist.github.com/nwolverson/5fccc7fce135ce99321f.js?file=client-use.jsx"></script>

### Animation

Something which is rather different is animation. In D3 you will generally [use
`transition` to animate a selection](https://bost.ocks.org/mike/transition/). For example, to fade bars in we would
apply a transition to the enter selection, while to animate the change in value
of bars when data is updated, we would apply a transition to the update selection.

For the chart above we would have a few options. The simplest to consider is where
we just want to animate the change in a property which can be styled with CSS, and we
can use CSS transitions with no code change.

{% highlight css %}
.chart rect {
  fill: steelblue;
  transition: width 1s;
}
{% endhighlight %}

For the case of adding elements which we want to be animated, there is a standard
React solution in the form of [`ReactCSSTransitionGroup`](https://facebook.github.io/react/docs/animation.html)/`ReactTransitionGroup`.
This sets things up to trigger a CSS transition on the element entering using a pair of
CSS classes in the style of [ng-animate](https://docs.angularjs.org/api/ngAnimate).
Our example above becomes:

<script src="https://gist.github.com/nwolverson/5fccc7fce135ce99321f.js?file=css-transition.jsx"></script>

Notice we specify the transition name `addBar`, which will correspond to our CSS,
and a component of `<g>` (because the default `<span>` will not work so well in our
  SVG). Then we add the accompanying CSS:

{% highlight css %}
.chart .addBar-enter {
	opacity: 0.01;
}
.chart .addBar-enter.addBar-enter-active {
	opacity: 1;
	transition: opacity .5s ease-in;
}
{% endhighlight %}

This is very similar to adding a D3 transition on the enter selection. If we wanted
to perform some other enter animation, for example a CSS animation
rather than transition, we could use the hooks on `ReactTransitionGroup` to do so.

### JavaScript animations

Unfortunately the original SVG example above had a `<text>` element with `x` and `y`
properties, which can not be set via CSS, so we cannot create a transition as above.
So on the data value changing, we would want something more like the D3 JavaScript animation
used by `transition()`.

There are a few libraries around to help with this, for example [react.animate](https://github.com/pleasetrythisathome/react.animate), [react-animate](https://github.com/elierotenberg/react-animate), [react-transition](https://github.com/pirelenito/react-transition), [react-transition-transformers](https://github.com/jason-wolfe/react-transition-transformers). But basically,
we can create an animation using a timer and interpolating animated values, making use of the React component
state to cause the interpolated value to be rendered.

A simple example of this can be found in the [example source for this post](https://github.com/nwolverson/blog-react-d3).
You can see this is a little painful to do by hand, but allows for arbitrary complex
JS animations - if not using one of the libraries mentioned above, it may make sense to
use D3 or one of the available JS easing/tweening libraries.

### Conclusion

I think D3 is great, in particular

* The way of thinking about constructing visualisations
* The library of existing visualisations to draw on

The implementation and the selection model are good as far as they go but may
not be the right fit for all applications, and you might want to consider
carefully which parts are the right fit for you.

In this post I looked at some simple examples of building charts using React rather
than D3 as rendering engine. This might be attractive in the context of a larger
React app, particularly where individual visualisation components are fairly small.

More fundamentally, there are contexts in which the React model makes things easier,
in particular specifying the desired DOM output and relying on the virtual-dom diffing
to sort out updates, rather than explicitly having to consider enter/exit/update selections.
On top of that the use of JSX and interpolation can make things a little easier
to read. On the other hand it can be seen that some things fit less well into this
model, so it's important to keep an open mind.
