---
title: "Pride 2024: Pride is a verb, not just a noun"
date: 2024-05-22 00:00:00 Z
categories: 
- People
tags:
- Pride
- Diversity
- Inclusion
- Inclusivity
summary: 
author: csalt
layout: default_post
---
**FIXME Update the date**

It's June!  It's Pride month!

Corporate pride nonsense

## Wait, what?  Is that really what Pride is about to you?

If you're part of the LGBTQ community in some way, or even just if you're close to it, every year can feel a little bit like this.  Every corporation&mdash;including, let's be honest, Scott Logic&mdash;switches its logo to a rainbow version.  A lot will announce some sort of rainbow-themed product.  Train and bus companies will throw a party to unveil a rainbow-painted vehicle.  Then, at midnight on July 1st, the rainbow logos disappear again like so much faery gold.

Speaking as a self-identified queer person, this feels, frankly, unsupportive.  If your Pride support is something that can disappear from view overnight, is the LGBTQ community going to feel truly supported by you.  In some ways, performative-surface level support can feel worse than no support at all; it makes you feel like a pawn, like a figure rolled out to make the company look good.  That applies whether you're a customer, a consumer, or, I'm sure, an employee of those companies&mdash;after all, virtually all companies will have LGBTQ members of staff within their workforce, whether those people feel willing to be open about their personal life or not.

I'm lucky: I work at Scott Logic.  And here, we genuinely do take a lot of effort to make sure that our support for Pride isn't purely performative, that it isn't something that will just fade away in a few weeks time when the logo on our website goes back to the standard one.  We're striving constantly to ensure that everyone within Scott Logic feels included, that everyone at Scott Logic is able to bring their real self to work just as far as they are comfortable with, no more and no less.  We support our LGBTQ colleagues all year round to bring themselves fully to work.  We look around all the time to make sure we are doing our best to make our office environments safe spaces.  We support any colleagues wishing to transition to their true gender.  We have LBGTQ staff at all levels in the business, including in the boardroom, and have done almost since the company was founded.  We keep the Pride flag flying, every month of the year.

This is important.  It matters, because although in the UK the majority of people are fully accepting and supportive of the rights of LGBTQ people, a vocal minority of those who do not has in recent years been growing in size.  Hate crimes recorded against LGBTQ people have been increasing, up to and including murder.  Britain's position in the annual ILGA Rainbow Europe Index, a measure of LGBT safety and equality across the continent, has been dropping sharply.  Reactionary interests are seeing the growing support for the LGBTQ community, and are trying to push anti-LGBTQ policies as a result, even though the wider public shows very little concern on these issues.  The recently-announced guidance to English schools that they should not teach the truth that a person's gender can differ from that assigned at birth, is just one example, showing that attempts are clearly being made to return to the time 30 years ago when all UK public authorities were effectively barred from talking about LGBTQ issues at all.  In this context, Pride is still vital.  It's still a must.  All of us must be proud to stand up and say that, no, acceptance matters.  We do not want and do not consent to being forcibly returned to the society we had in the past, when "queer" was a term of abuse and rights such as marriage equality were a distant dream.

When I first started working at Scott Logic, I was in the closet.  To the vast majority of people around me&mdash;everyone other than a tiny number of my very oldest friends&mdash;I wasn't out.  My sexual orientation and my gender identity were both a very closely-guarded, very-well-hidden secret.  I know I'm not the first Scott Logician to say this, but if you can't bring your true self to work, if you are constantly hiding a large part of yourself, it is very hard work.  It involves constantly masking, constantly checking what you say or do, constantly filtering yourself.  It's a bit like if you left your computer running a whole pile of software that you don't really need.  It's a full-time cognitive load that is a constant drain on you.  It's feeling you can't talk about your partners or your past; it's feeling you have something to hide, and waking from regular nightmares in which you've been *found out*.  For years, I was scared of coming out; when I did, it was a massive weight off my mind.  I'd figuratively dressed in a chain-mail suit to protect myself, a suit of armour that grew one link at a time, and I didn't realise just how heavy it was until I took it off.  Looking back, I know now, just how much coming out and being able to be myself at work, has helped me grow, develop, and be able to be a better developer and consultant.

**FIXME remove everything below here**
-- 
Start with an opening paragraph that's literally just a list of buzzwords around Pride, the sort of thing that big corporations accused of using Pride solely for marketing to.
 
Mention how we try to make Pride a real and meaningful thing at SL.  Talk about how there has been a decline in queer acceptance over the last ten years that reinforces the fact that we still need Pride
 
Talk about bringing your whole self to work to the extent you are comfortable to, and how this helps both individuals in the workplace, and the whole workplace-as-community
 
Bring that back around to how beneficial it is for companies to genuinely and meaningfully participate in Pride, and talk a bit about what we believe at SL.