---
author: msuperina
title: 'React time travel: the store may not be enough'
layout: default_post
summary: >-
  Your store is the source of truth... as long as it makes sense.  A concrete
  example integrating Redux with React Router
tags:
  - relogic
  - React
  - flow
  - Redux
  - React Router
categories:
  - Tech
---

In 
[Level-up your dependencies](http://blog.scottlogic.com/2017/02/28/relogic.html) 
we discussed one way to do dependency injection in React applications using the 
context, introduced the abstraction of flow of logic - 
which is anything not enclosed in the lifecycle of a component - and quickly 
went through a couple of examples involving Redux and React Router separately.  
  
We ended the article pointing out a conflict when using Redux and React Router 
together and promised a detailed solution here in part 2. It turns out it has 
some surprising implications I did not expect when I first thought of 
[relogic](https://github.com/msuperina/relogic).  
    
As a reminder, here is the problem.  
  
## Using Redux and React Router together
  
Suppose you have a `/users` route that loads a list of users, cache them in the
store and then renders them.  
    
If you are using React Router you may be aware of the debate whether the route 
should be stored in the Redux store and if so, when to dispatch the action 
`CHANGE_ROUTE` to create the new state with the updated route.  

Imagine the following scenario: you are in another route where you click on a 
`<Link to="/users" />` that directs you to `/users` or put even more 
explicitly, you are in `/users` and hit refresh.    
  
When do you dispatch the `CHANGE_ROUTE` action? 
  
Does the user action trigger the route change and then the store must be 
manually updated? `route change -> store change`  
In this case, the store is not the source of truth any more, and relying on the 
store to get the current route may lead to some conflicts.  
  
Or instead does the router listen to the store changes and as a consequence 
updates the current route?  
This way the store remains the source of truth but it gets really difficult: 
any click on the `<Link />` must be intercepted to prevent it from directly 
triggering the route change. And on page refresh well... it's too late, the 
route has already changed...  
  
Two main libraries try to fill the gap namely redux-router and 
react-router-redux. The 
[readme of redux-router](https://github.com/acdlite/redux-router#differences-with-react-router-redux) 
summarizes the differences between them pretty well. It explains their 
respective strengths and weaknesses and to summarize, they both try to solve 
the problem by somehow making the store aware of the current route or location, 
but none of them is reliable.  
So what are we supposed to do in this situation?  
  
## Ignore the route
  
<blockquote>You should think of your route components as entry points into the 
app that don't know or care about the parent, and the parent shouldn't 
know/care about the children.</blockquote>
[Says](https://github.com/ReactTraining/react-router/issues/1857) one of the 
authors of React Router.  
  
And this is 
[a stackoverflow answer](http://stackoverflow.com/a/36657751/4209634) 
from the author of Redux:  
<blockquote>I would suggest just using React Router directly and not keeping 
searchState in Redux. React Router will inject URL parameters into your 
components, and you can use them in mapStateToProps(state, ownProps) to 
calculate the final props.</blockquote>  
  
They seem to agree: `route change -> store change` and do not keep your route 
in your store. Ok but in practice, what does it mean? what does it imply?  
  
Personally, I was not completely satisfied with part 1 of the article. Sure it 
explains a simple way to handle complexity at a higher level, and it does not 
pretend to discard any other opinionated approach. It actually encourages to 
leverage the advantages of any library that tries to help with a particular 
dependency. But I felt something was missing.  
  
So I decided I needed a proof of concept, and realized that coordinating time 
travelling with both Redux and React Router would be a good one, because it is 
one of the motivations to look for libraries that bridge the gap between those
two.   
  
This experiment lead to 
[relogic-redux-devtools](https://www.npmjs.com/package/relogic-redux-devtools) 
a module built around 
[relogic](https://www.npmjs.com/package/relogic). 
The [demo](https://github.com/msuperina/relogic-demo) now uses it.  
  
## Time travel
  
Time travel is the ability to move back and forth among the previous states of 
an application and view the results in real time. With Redux, given a specific 
state and a specific action, the next state of the application is always 
exactly the same. Redux is a predictable state container and it easy to 
implement time travel with it.      
    
There are several ways to view the results of time travelling. For the purpose 
of this demo I decided to follow the easiest possible path and downloaded the 
[Redux DevTools Extension](https://github.com/zalmoxisus/redux-devtools-extension) 
for Chrome. One click and I was up and running, really impressive!  

Essentially, the extension consists of a store and a monitor displaying its 
current state. The monitor allows to jump from one action to another and 
expand the state corresponding to the last selected action. It is possible to programmatically dispatch actions to change this state, and 
intercept the state change by listening to the user interactions with the 
monitor.    
  
The idea is that an application can use the DevTools extension and by 
synchronizing the state of the application with the state of the DevTools it is 
possible to jump to a previous state in the DevTools and view the corresponding 
rendering of the application in the UI.  
  
The repository describes how to use the extension and the API is very well 
documented for a basic usage.  
  
It exposes a `__REDUX_DEVTOOLS_EXTENSION__` global to instantiate

~~~ js
const devToolsExtension = window && window.__REDUX_DEVTOOLS_EXTENSION__;
devToolsExtension();
~~~ 

in order to establish a connection to the DevTools

~~~ js
const devTools = devToolsExtension.connect();
~~~

which can be initialized with an initial state.  

~~~ js
devTools.init({ /* initial state */ });
~~~

Then it is possible to manually send a new action and state to be displayed on 
the monitor  

~~~ js
devTools.send(/* action */, /* state */);
~~~

and listen to messages dispatched from the monitor, for instance when one jumps 
to a state in the past.  
  
~~~ js
devTools.subscribe((message) => { 
  if (message.type === 'DISPATCH' && 
      message.payload.type === 'JUMP_TO_ACTION') {

        // get the devTools state
      const devToolsState = JSON.parse(message.state);

      // do something with devTools state
  }
});
~~~
  
This model works well when we restrict the scope of the application to Redux 
store only, without triggering any side-effect between 2 actions dispatches.  
But what if there are several routes with side effects? As we already 
mentioned, we decided to not store the current route in the application store 
so how do we keep track of it?  
  
## Time travel with Redux and React Router
  
Suppose page A displays a list of elements A and page B displays a list of 
elements B.  
Let's go through a possible sequence of actions manually dispatched by a user    
  
~~~
man_dispatch = manually dispatched

action                                         state
---------------------------------------------- --------------------------------
1- load page A                                 {}
2- man_dispatch({ type: ADD_A, value: 1 })     { A: [1] }
3- man_dispatch({ type: ADD_A, value: 2 })     { A: [1, 2] }
4- load page B                                 { A: [1, 2] }
5- man_dispatch({ type: ADD_B, value: 1 })     { A: [1, 2], B: [1] }
~~~
  
After all the steps, we are in page B and we can see the element 1 of type B. 
If we time travel to step 2, we are still in page B and we see nothing, because 
there is no information in the store about the route and there is no element B 
at this step. There is one A but we cannot see it because we are on page B.
Instead, we should be in page A and see element 1 of type A.  
  
This is one of the reasons why people want the history in the store when doing 
time travelling.  
  
## The store is the source of truth... but which truth?
  
You can compare time travelling across the Redux store as moving a cursor in a 
one dimension environment, with a time axis and several steps representing the 
sequence of state across time.    
In the previous example we had 4 steps related to the store.

~~~  
state: {}
state: { A: [1] }
state: { A: [1, 2] }
state: { A: [1, 2], B: [1] }

            {}              {A:[1]}         {A:[1,2]}       {A:[1,2],B:[1]}
            |               |               |               |       
------------------------------------------------------------------------------>
                                                                          time
~~~

But we also need to track the route change, which can be represented by 2 more 
steps. So how about keeping the previous steps and adding another dimension?   

~~~  
location: { page: A }    
location: { page: A }    state: {}
location: { page: A }    state: { A: [1] }
location: { page: A }    state: { A: [1, 2] }
location: { page: B }    state: { A: [1, 2] }
location: { page: B }    state: { A: [1, 2], B: [1] }
~~~

The key here is that there are 2 stores: one for the application and one for 
the DevTools monitor. And the trick is to keep the application state free from 
the current route, but synchronize the DevTools state with both application 
state changes and location changes.  
  
* Any action dispatched to the application store is also dispatched to the 
DevTools store.  
* Any route change in the application dispatches a route change in the DevTools 
store.  
  
And in turn  
  
* Any action dispatched to the DevTools store is then split: the state part 
is dispatched to the application store, the location part changes the current 
route if needed.  
  
The point is, before assuming the store is the source of truth, we have to 
define on which basis.  
It's like saying 3 + 7 = 10. Are you sure about that? Add 7 days to Wednesday 
and you get? Wednesday... or, if you prefer in base 8: 
011(3) + 111(7) = 010(2)...
   
So here is one rule upon which we can define our environment: the store and the 
location are orthogonal. Changing one does not impact the other.  
  
~~~  
location: { page: A }    
location: { page: A }    state: {}
location: { page: A }    state: { A: [1] }
location: { page: A }    state: { A: [1, 2] }
location: { page: B }    state: { A: [1, 2] }
location: { page: B }    state: { A: [1, 2], B: [1] }

   {page:A}                                             {page:B}
   |                                                    |
   |                                                    |
   |        {}              {A:[1]}         {A:[1,2]}   |   {A:[1,2],B:[1]}
   |        |               |               |           |   |       
------------------------------------------------------------------------------>
                                                                          time
~~~

We just added one dimension to the environment. We still have the time axis and 
we added a dependencies axis. Now not only can we keep track of the changes of 
the Redux store or the React Router location, we can also apply the same 
pattern to any kind of dependency.  
  
We just pushed the problem one level up and the important bit is that all of 
this is possible if we consider every dependency at the same level. Instead of 
desperately synchronizing the application store with changes related to other 
dependencies (and this also applies to using thunks to manage side-effects) we 
have a much broader impact with very small effort if we ignore the 
synchronization.  
  
If you are interested in the implementation, feel free to get in touch or have 
a look at the 
[source code](https://github.com/msuperina/relogic-redux-devtools), it is 
exhaustively documented.   
relogic-redux-devtools defines a plugin system extendable to any kind of 
dependency and provides hooks to modify the default logic of a dependency in 
order to synchronize its state with the DevTools state (note that I 
intentionally said state of a dependency...).  
  
On top of that, this module does one more thing. The previous example was the 
simple case, but it does not reflect what happens with side effects. Suppose 
when loading page B a bunch of actions are dispatched automatically.    
  
~~~
man_dispatch = manually dispatched
auto_dispatch = automatically dispatched

action                                         state
---------------------------------------------- --------------------------------
1- load page A                                 {}
2- man_dispatch({ type: ADD_A, value: 1 })     { A: [1] }
3- man_dispatch({ type: ADD_A, value: 2 })     { A: [1, 2] }
4- load page B                                 { A: [1, 2] }
5- auto_dispatch({ type: ADD_B, value: 1 })    { A: [1, 2], B: [1] }
6- auto_dispatch({ type: ADD_B, value: 2 })    { A: [1, 2], B: [1, 2] }
7- auto_dispatch({ type: ADD_B, value: 3 })    { A: [1, 2], B: [1, 2, 3] }
~~~

At the end of the sequence, we are on page B with elements 1, 2, 3 of type B 
rendered on the screen.  
If we click on step 2 in the DevTools extension, now that we use 
relogic-redux-devtools, the route changes in the UI and we see element 1 of 
type A, as expected.  
But if we click on step 5, page B is loaded, all the actions are automatically 
dispatched and we end up with elements 1, 2, 3 of type B on the screen.  
  
Great... another useless library...   
  
## Flows to the rescue
  
It turns out, the most interesting part of relogic is that it's just a 
[closure](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/111102/how-do-javascript-closures-work/6472397#6472397). And because we have to 
use `setLogic` to define some logic, we can add a step into this function.  
  
Remember in part 1 the paragraph about proxying, when I wrote that importing a 
function in a file and using it in a component makes the function a proxy 
handler of the functionality it should provide? Well actually, relogic moves 
all that part to the entry point of the application: the memory injected 
into `<Relogic memory/>` is a proxy handler of the application bootstrap.  
Really, relogic is just a mechanism to move all the complexity from many points 
to a single one.  
It is easier to control this single entry point, and the cool thing is that we 
can change `setLogic` based on the environment we want to target.  
  
This is what relogic-redux-devtools does. It adds an internal flag indicating 
in which mode the application is running and adds a step to `setLogic` to 
override a function passed as flows of logic.  
  
* in normal mode the function runs normally  
* in frozen mode the function is replaced by an empty function   
  
Then every time the DevTools monitor dispatches an action 
  
* it first freezes the application  
* then calls whatever comes next in the stack  
* and finally resumes the application  
  
For instance in our previous example if we click on a "go to page B" action in 
the DevTools extension  
  
* it first freezes the application  
* then calls `history.push('/pageB')` which automatically calls some function 
to dispatch the actions, but the application is frozen so this function is 
replaced by an empty function and is not executed  
* and finally resumes the application  
  
As a result, if we go back to the end of the previous example, when we time 
travel to step 5 page B is loaded, no action is automatically dispatched and we 
get the expected state from DevTools, with element 1 of type B on the screen.   
  
relogic-redux-devtools acts as a middleware and replaces `setLogic` with a very 
similar method that first deeply parses the logic passed as argument, then 
replaces any flow with the behaviour we previously described, and finally set 
the new overridden logic.
  
In the previous example, the flow would be a function which dispatches the 
actions and is called on page B enter. It is the function to override. As a 
general rule of thumb when using relogic, a flow is a high level function added 
as method of the logic object injected in the application.      
  
We may imagine this middleware could simply override each function added to 
the logic, but in order to allow better integration with other middleware I 
prefer adding a flag to any function that can be considered a flow.  
  
This would be the perfect use case for a decorator.  
  
~~~
@flow
function fn() {}
~~~
  
but I hate polyfills and adding unnecessary code to my bundle so we are just 
going to do.
  
~~~
function fn() {}
flow = true;
~~~
  
a la jQuery...  
Feel free to file an issue...  
  
## Conclusion

If you regularly use flows you can see the benefits. They describe high order 
behaviours and are good candidates as special citizens of the application.  
  
It is worth noting that everything described in part 1 and part 2 should be 
considered an abstraction. The last thing I want is to define another syntax. 
Sure I am presenting some implementations otherwise I would not be able to 
demonstrate the results, but the bottom line is there is more in React than the 
view layer, and it can get difficult very quickly.  
  
There are a few issues to solve when developing real world applications and 
carefully planning the dependency management is definitely one of them. Many 
times thinking exclusively about state management is too simplistic and can 
lead to over-complicated situations.   

Flow control is one way to solve the problem. It simply moves the complexity 
from many points to a single one, easy to test and to control, generally one 
level above all the dependencies, which makes synchronization much more easy to 
handle.  
